---
layout: post
title: Hukku et al. 2020 AJHG
tags: [StatisticalGenetics]
description: Limitations of probabilistic colocalization analysis
---

In statistical genetics, colocalization aims to identify genetic loci with the same causal variants associated with multiple traits. For example, researchers in the GTEx consortium applied colocalization analyses on expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) and genome-wide association studies (GWAS) data to identify genetic loci driving both gene expression levels and a trait (GTEx Consortium, 2020). One reason why colocalization is particularly useful is that even without knowing the true causal variant, one can test whether the association signals indicate that the traits share the genetic association. The general methodologies are described concisely in Hukku et al. (2020). The authors did a good job of laying out how the different probabilistic colocalization methods are similar and distinct.

Although colocalization is a powerful statistical tool for geneticists to be able to connect genetic associations to multiple traits, it is not without limitations. Hukku and colleagues systematically tested how well methods identify truly shared signals (i.e. power) and how precise its results are (i.e. false positive rates), through simulated data. In practice, users must make judgements about whether an output implies colocalization or not, so the authors’ investigation has important implications.

Two key takeaways for me were that (1) colocalization methods applied to existing genetic association data are inherently low-powered, and (2) with proper prior parameter settings, false discovery rates are typically low. To begin with, genetic association data have inherent noise. Measurement or diagnosis errors are to be expected, let alone the intrinsic phenotypic noise. Genotype imputation step, which is commonplace in GWAS, may introduce another layer of noise to the data. Moreover, individual associations generally have weak effects, which further reduces power of colocalization. Both of these effects can lead to lower power, and the authors astutely distinguished false negatives stemming from noisy data and those from weak signals. I wonder if one would be able to determine the cause for potential false negatives with real data with no true labels. Hence, the bottom line is that accurate phenotyping and increased sample size will lead to better power for colocalization applications.

The other facet of performance is false positive rates; a concern for any statistical test is whether a ‘positive’ result truly reflects the truth. The authors tested two potential causes: misspecification of parameters and population mismatch between the two association studies. For coloc (Giambartolomei et al. 2014), they tested the performance of using the overestimated ‘default’ prior probabilities of shared signals and observed higher-than-expected false discovery rates. Enloc, which is the method developed by the authors, intentionally underestimates its prior parameters based on the data, so it calibrates its false discovery rates well. One note, however, is that a recent article on coloc recommends a more conservative prior probability parameters (Wallace et al. 2020). On the issue of population mismatch, the authors demonstrated that it primarily leads to reduction in statistical power, not false discoveries. In other words, a positive result from using a pair of association data with different local linkage disequilibrium structures likely reflects actual colocalization. 

To summarize, there are several best practices to remember. Perhaps most importantly, properly calibrating the prior probability parameters is crucial so as not to inflate the colocalization signals. Relatedly, it is essential to report the parameters used and not over-interpret the colocalization results because the outcome is sensitive to them. Practically, colocalization methods have limited statistical power due to weak genetic associations and noisy data. However, as better quality data accumulate with increasing sample size, the utility of colocalization can be further improved. Moreover, association data with mismatching LD structure and loci with multiple causal variants (i.e. allelic heterogeneity) also hurt statistical power, so generating data with consistent LD structure, and incorporating state-of-the-art fine-mapping methods to account for allelic heterogeneity will lead to better results.
